URL: http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?Sect1=PTO2&Sect2=HITOFF&u=%2Fnetahtml%2FPTO%2Fsearch-adv.htm&r=1&f=G&l=50&d=PTXT&p=1&S1=5378631&OS=5378631&RS=5378631

PATN
WKU  053786319
SRC  8
APN  195248&
APT  1
ART  189
APD  19940214
TTL  Separation of strontium from fecal matter
ISD  19950103
NCL  18
ECL  1
EXP  Redding; David A.
INVT
NAM  Kester; Dianne K.
CTy  Idaho Falls
STA  ID
ASSG
NAM  United States Department of Energy
CTy  Washington
STA  DC
COD  06
CLAS
OCL  436 59
XCL  436 79
XCL  436155
XCL  436175
EDF  6
ICL  G01N 3348
ICL  G01N 3350
FSC  436
FSS  59;79;155;175
UREF
PNO  5190881
ISD  19930300
NAM  McKibbin
OCL  436 82
OREF
PAL  Martin, D. B. "Determination of Strontium-89 and -90 in Soil with Total
      Sample Decomposition", Analytical Chemistry, vol. 51, No. 12, pp.
      1968-1972, 1979.
LREP
FR2  Park; Daniel D.
FR2  Anderson; Thomas G.
FR2  Moser; William R.
ABST
PAL  A method of separating strontium from a sample of biomass potentially
      contaminated with various radionuclides. After the sample is reduced,
      dissociated, and carried on a first precipitate of actinides, the first
      precipitate is removed to leave a supernate. Next, oxalic acid is added to
      the supernate to cause a second precipitate of strontium and calcium.
      Then, after separating the second precipitate, nitric acid is added to the
      second precipitate to cause a third precipitate of strontium. The calcium
      remains in solution and is discarded to leave essentially the precipitate
      of strontium.
GOVT
PAC  CONTRACTUAL ORIGIN OF THE INVENTION
PAR  The United States Government has rights in this invention pursuant to
      Contract No. DE-AC07-84ID12435 between the U.S. Department of Energy and
      Westinghouse Electric Company.
BSUM
PAC  BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION
PAR  The present invention relates to a method of separating strontium, and,
      more particularly, to a method of separating strontium from a sample of
      biomass potentially contaminated with various radionuclides.
PAR  Radioactive strontium is a radionuclide which represents a hazard to man
      because of its long half-life and, if ingested, its tendency to be
      retained in the human body. In the event that radionuclides such as
      strontium or various actinides are ingested, it is desirable to monitor
      the discharge or release of these radionuclides from the human body
      through analysis of fecal matter. In laboratories and other facilities
      where potential for radionuclide contamination exists, fecal analysis for
      strontium is routinely conducted for individuals who are terminating from
      their position or are suspected of having been contaminated with
      radionuclides.
PAR  Methods for separating and analyzing radioactive actinides from a biomass
      sample are well known and have been extensively developed for the U.S.
      Department of Energy. These methods, described in the Department's
      internal procedure, USDOE, RESL/ID, A-16, 1981, as well as in U.S. Pat.
      No. 5,190,881, involve the use of an iron phosphate precipitation step to
      separate actinides from a solution, or supernate. However, there are no
      established procedures for the separation of strontium from a biomass
      sample wherein an iron phosphate precipitation step is involved.
PAR  Various strontium removal methods are known in the prior art. But these
      methods, usually used to remove strontium from nuclear fuel wastes, are
      not well adapted to the separation of small amounts of strontium from a
      small biomass sample to conduct radioactive analysis. Other separation
      methods require the use of highly toxic fuming nitric acid which is
      hazardous and difficult to dispose of.
PAR  In view of the foregoing, the general object of this invention is to
      provide a method of separating strontium from a sample of biomass that is
      efficient and which reduces the amount of hazardous waste that is
      generated.
PAR  Additional objects, advantages and novel features of the invention will
      become apparent to those skilled in the art upon examination of the
      following and by practice of the invention.
PAC  SUMMARy OF THE INVENTION
PAR  To achieve the foregoing and other objects, this invention provides a
      method of separating strontium from a sample of biomass potentially
      contaminated with various radionuclides. After the sample is reduced,
      dissociated, and carried on a first precipitate of actinides, the first
      precipitate is removed to leave a supernate. Next, oxalic acid is added to
      the supernate to cause a second precipitate of strontium and calcium.
      Then, after separating the second precipitate, nitric acid is added to the
      second precipitate to cause a third precipitate of strontium. The calcium
      remains in solution and is discarded to leave essentially only the third
      precipitate of strontium.
PAR  To separate the strontium from its yttrium daughter, water and
      Diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA) is added to the third
      precipitate to dissolve it. Then, sodium sulfate (Na.sub.2 SO.sub.4) is
      added to cause a fourth precipitate of strontium while leaving the yttrium
      in solution. Finally, the solution is discarded to leave the fourth
      precipitate essentially free of yttrium.
PAR  To determine the strontium concentration of the sample, the fourth
      precipitate is first placed in solution using DTPA and then allowed to
      stand for a seven day in-growth period wherein yttrium-90 is allowed to
      form. Then, after separating yttrium from strontium using conventional
      separation methods, the yttrium is counted to determine the strontium
      concentration.
DETD
PAC  DESCRIPTION OF THE PREFERRED EMBODIMENT
PAR  The invention is directed to the separation of strontium from a sample of
      biomass suspected of containing radionuclides. In the embodiment disclosed
      herein, a fecal sample is reduced, dissociated, and carried on a first
      precipitate of actinides to leave a supernate. Next, oxalic acid is added
      to the supernate to cause a precipitate of strontium and calcium. Then,
      nitric acid is added to the precipitate to cause a precipitate of
      strontium while the calcium is left in solution.
PAR  As in previously known procedure for fecal dissolution and reduction, the
      fecal sample is dried on a hot plate, then ignited and muffled in a
      furnace at 550 C. for sixteen hours. After adding an appropriate
      strontium-85 tracer to the sample ash, the ash is treated with
      hydrochloric, nitric, perchloric and hydrofluoric acids to remove organic
      and siliceous material. The slurry of salts remaining are taken through a
      pyrophosphate fusion on a hot plate to facilitate the complete dissolution
      in 2 Molar (M) Hcl. Iron(III) is added to act as a carrier. A reduction is
      performed using ascorbic acid and titanium trichloride. The pH of the
      sample is carefully adjusted to about 3.0-3.5 using ammonium hydroxide
      which precipitates iron(II) phosphate. The actinides, including americium,
      reduced uranium and plutonium, are carried on the iron phosphate
      precipitate, while the strontium remains in the solution, or supernate.
PAR  After the iron phosphate precipitate is removed from the supernate, a
      stable strontium and calcium carrier is added to the supernate to
      facilitate further precipitation. In the preferred embodiment, the
      strontium carrier is obtained by dissolving Sr(NO.sub.3).sub.2 in 4M
      nitric acid, while the calcium carrier is obtained by dissolving
      CaCl.sub.2 in water. Next, a saturated solution of oxalic acid is added to
      the supernate to form calcium and strontium oxalate precipitates. To
      facilitate the precipitation of strontium and calcium, ammonium hydroxide
      is added to the solution to raise its pH to about 4. Also, the solution is
      heated to boiling on a hot plate while continuously stirring. After
      allowing the mixture to stand overnight, the mixture is then centrifuged,
      and the resulting supernate is removed. To save time, the entire mixture
      may be centrifuged immediately after allowing the mixture to cool to room
      temperature.
PAR  To separate strontium from calcium, concentrated nitric acid is added to
      the remaining oxalate precipitate, and then the entire mixture is brought
      to boiling. The more hazardous "fuming" nitric acid is not required for
      the invention, and consequently, any material handling and waste disposal
      requirements are simplified. By the addition of the concentrated nitric
      acid, the oxalate precipitate is dissolved and metastasizes into a
      strontium nitrate precipitate, while leaving the more soluble calcium
      nitrate in solution. After boiling, the mixture is cooled in a cold water
      bath and is allowed to remain cold for about 30.+-.10 minutes to decrease
      the solubility of the strontium nitrate precipitate. Next, after
      centrifuging the mixture and discarding the supernate, the strontium
      nitrate precipitate is dissolved in 15.+-.5 mL of water. If any residual
      precipitate remains after dissolution in water, the solution is
      centrifuged to remove the residual precipitate. To insure that essentially
      all strontium has been removed, the residual precipitate is checked for
      .sup.85 Sr using a NaI .gamma. detector.
PAR  If .sup.85 Sr is detected in the residual precipitate, the precipitate is
      dissolved in 1.3M Diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA) to further
      dissociate strontium from the precipitate. To promote dissolution of
      strontium, the solution needs to be basic. To test for basicity, 5.+-.1
      drops of m-Cresolsulfonephthalein (meta-Cresol Purple, or MCP) indicator
      is added to the solution. The solution should turn purple. However, if the
      solution is not purple, or basic, 18M sodium hydroxide is added until the
      if solution turns purple. The solution is then heated in a hot water bath
      for 5.+-.2 minutes and vortexed to completely dissolve any remaining or
      additional precipitates. If any precipitation remains, the solution should
      be further centrifuged to remove the precipitation. This second residual
      precipitation may again be checked for .sup.85 Sr using a NaI detector to
      insure that no strontium remains in the second residual precipitation. The
      strontium/DTPA solution is then added to the strontium/water solution from
      the previous step.
PAR  If .sup.85 Sr was not detected in the first residual precipitate, the DTPA
      is added directly to the strontium/water solution using the MCP indicator
      and sodium hydroxide as described above. If any extraneous precipitation
      occurs, the precipitation is removed after centrifuging.
PAR  At this point, yttrium-90, which is a daughter of strontium-90, is
      separated from the strontium. Since the yttrium-90 daughter has a higher
      energy data than the strontium-90 mother, it is normally desirable to
      count the yttrium-90 at the end of a predetermined in-growth period in
      which the yttrium-90 is allowed to form. Accordingly, to insure that no
      yttrium remains in the strontium/DTPA solution at the beginning of the
      in-growth period, all yttrium must be removed.
PAR  There are various known methods of separating strontium from its yttrium
      daughter. In the embodiment of the invention described herein, 5.+-.1 mL
      of 1.4M sodium sulfate (Na.sub.2 SO.sub.4) is added to the strontium/DTPA
      solution. This step, by precipitating SrSO.sub.4, separates the yttrium
      daughter from the strontium. To facilitate the precipitation of
      SrSO.sub.4, 5.+-.1 mL of glacial acetic acid is initially added to the
      solution. Gradually, more glacial acetic acid is added until the pH of the
      solution reaches 4.0.+-.0.2. Thereafter, the solution is heated in a
      boiling water bath for at least 5 minutes and the solution centrifuged for
      10.+-.5 minutes to separate the strontium precipitate from the supernate.
      The in-growth period of the yttrium-90 daughter begins at this point, so
      the date and time of when the supernate is discarded is carefully
      recorded.
PAR  After discarding the supernate, 5.+-.2 mL of 1.3M DTPA is added to the
      strontium precipitate to place it in a solution form for counting. To
      enhance the dissolution, 5.+-.2 mL of MCP is added to the solution and 18M
      sodium hydroxide is added a drop at a time until the purple endpoint of
      the MCP indicator is reached. If all of the strontium precipitate has not
      dissolved at this point, add more DTPA in mL aliquot up to a 10 mL total.
PAR  Any time during the in-growth period, a count can be made to determine the
      .sup.85 Sr tracer concentration within the solution. By comparing the
      .sup.85 Sr concentration within the solution with that of a control
      sample, the quantity of the .sup.85 Sr lost in the separation procedure
      can be determined to estimate the yield of the .sup.90 Sr recovery. After
      counting, the solution is diluted to 25.+-.5 mL with water and the
      in-growth period in continued. The period should last for at least seven
      days to achieve over 65% secular equilibrium.
PAR  After the seven day in-growth period, yttrium-90 can be separated from the
      strontium using a number of conventional, well known separation
      procedures. In the invention described herein, the yttrium is separated by
      precipitating yttrium hydroxide using sodium hydroxide, while leaving the
      strontium in the DTPA solution. A further purification may involve the
      extraction of yttrium into a 50/50 solution of Di-phosphoric acid (HDEHP)
      and dodecane out of a weak HCl solution. The yttrium is then back
      extracted into a strong HCl solution and precipitated as a final oxalate
      precipitate. The final yttrium oxalate precipitate is then counted using a
      gas flow proportional low background beta counter to determine the
      quantity of the strontium-90.
PAR  Alternate embodiments of the invention includes the application of the
      foregoing strontium separation procedure to various biomass or other
      samples including urine, vegetation, animal or human tissue, soil and
      water. The procedure described herein can be used on almost any sample so
      long as an iron phosphate precipitation step or its equivalent is included
      in the separation process to remove actinides while leaving strontium in
      the supernate.
PAR  The foregoing description of a preferred embodiment of the invention has
      been presented for purposes of illustration and description. It is not
      intended to be exhaustive or to limit the invention to the precise form
      disclosed. As stated above, the procedure is not limited to the analysis
      of fecal samples only. The procedure is easily adaptable to various other
      samples which may require strontium analysis. The embodiment described
      herein explains the principles of the invention so that others skilled in
      the art may practice the invention in various embodiments and with various
      modifications as suited to the particular use contemplated. It is intended
      that the scope of the invention be defined by the claims appended hereto.
CLMS
STM  The embodiments of this invention in which an exclusive property or
      privilege is claimed are defined as follows:
NUM  1.
PAR  1. A method of separating strontium from a sample of biomass potentially
      contaminated with various radionuclides, said sample having been reduced,
      dissociated, and carried on a first precipitate of actinides, comprising
      the steps of:
PA1  removing the first precipitate to leave a supernate containing strontium;
PA1  adding oxalic acid to the supernate to cause a second precipitate of
      strontium and calcium;
PA1  separating the second precipitate from the supernate;
PA1  adding nitric acid to the second precipitate to cause a third precipitate
      of strontium while leaving the calcium in solution; and
PA1  separating the third precipitate from the solution.
NUM  2.
PAR  2. The method of claim 1 wherein the second and third precipitates are
      respectively separated from the solution by centrifuging.
NUM  3.
PAR  3. The method of claim 1 including the step of adding a stable strontium
      and calcium carrier to the supernate after removing the first precipitate.
NUM  4.
PAR  4. The method of claim 1 including the step of adding ammonium hydroxide to
      the supernate after adding oxalic acid to facilitate precipitation of
      strontium and calcium.
NUM  5.
PAR  5. The method of claim 1 including the step of cooling the third
      precipitate and the solution in a cold water bath before separating said
      third precipitate from said solution.
NUM  6.
PAR  6. The method of claim 1 including the steps of:
PA1  boiling the supernate after addition of the oxalic acid; and boiling the
      solution after addition of the nitric acid.
NUM  7.
PAR  7. The method of claim 1 wherein the nitric acid is concentrated nitric
      acid.
NUM  8.
PAR  8. The method of claim 1 wherein the sample of biomass is selected from the
      group consisting of urine, feces, vegetation, tissue, soil and water.
NUM  9.
PAR  9. The method of claim 1 including the steps of dissolving the third
      precipitate in water and centrifuging the solution to remove residual
      precipitates.
NUM  10.
PAR  10. The method of claim 9 including the step of adding Diethylenetriamine
      pentaacetic acid (DTPA) and sodium hydroxide to the residual precipitates
      to further separate strontium from said residual precipitates.
NUM  11.
PAR  11. The method of claim 1 including the steps of:
PA1  adding water and Diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA) to the third
      precipitate to dissolve said third precipitate to form a strontium/DTPA
      solution;
PA1  adding sodium sulfate (Na.sub.2 SO.sub.4) to the strontium/DTPA solution to
      cause a fourth precipitate of strontium while leaving yttrium in solution;
PA1  discarding the solution to leave the fourth precipitate essentially free of
      yttrium; and
PA1  adding DTPA to the fourth precipitate to place said fourth precipitate in
      solution.
NUM  12.
PAR  12. The method of claim 11 including the step of adding sodium hydroxide to
      the third precipitate to promote dissolution of said third precipitate.
NUM  13.
PAR  13. The method of claim 11 including the step of adding glacial acetic acid
      to the strontium/DTPA solution to promote the precipitation of strontium
      sulfate (SrSO.sub.4).
NUM  14.
PAR  14. The method of claim 11 including the step of counting strontium-85 in
      the fourth precipitate solution to calculate yield of the strontium-90
      recovery.
NUM  15.
PAR  15. The method c,f claim 11 including the step of standing the fourth
      precipitate solution for a seven day in-growth period wherein yttrium-90
      is allowed to form.
NUM  16.
PAR  16. The method c,f claim 15 including the steps of separating yttrium from
      strontium after the seven day in-growth period and counting the yttrium to
      determine the strontium concentration.
NUM  17.
PAR  17. A method of separating strontium from a sample of biomass potentially
      contaminated with various radionuclides, said sample having been reduced,
      dissociated, and carried on a first precipitate of actinides, comprising
      the steps of:
PA1  removing the first precipitate to leave a supernate containing strontium;
PA1  adding oxalic acid to the supernate to cause a second precipitate of
      strontium and calcium;
PA1  separating the second precipitate from the supernate;
PA1  adding nitric acid to the second precipitate to cause a third precipitate
      of strontium while leaving the calcium in solution;
PA1  separating the third precipitate from the solution;
PA1  adding water and Diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA) to the third
      precipitate to dissolve said third precipitate to form a strontium/DTPA
      solution;
PA1  adding sodium sulfate (Na.sub.2 SO.sub.4) to the strontium/DTPA solution to
      cause a fourth precipitate of strontium while leaving yttrium in solution;
PA1  discarding the solution to leave the fourth precipitate essentially free of
      yttrium; and
PA1  adding DTPA to the fourth precipitate to place said fourth precipitate in
      solution.
NUM  18.
PAR  18. A method of separating strontium from a sample of biomass potentially
      contaminated with various radionuclides, said sample having been reduced,
      dissociated, and carried on a first precipitate of actinides, comprising
      the steps of:
PA1  removing the first precipitate to leave a supernate containing strontium;
PA1  adding oxalic acid to the supernate to cause a second precipitate of
      strontium and calcium;
PA1  separating the second precipitate from the supernate;
PA1  adding nitric acid to the second precipitate to cause a third precipitate
      of strontium while leaving the calcium in solution;
PA1  separating the third precipitate from the solution;
PA1  adding water and Diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA) to the third
      precipitate to dissolve said third precipitate to form a strontium/DTPA
      solution;
PA1  adding sodium sulfate (Na.sub.2 SO.sub.4) to the strontium/DTPA solution to
      cause a fourth precipitate of strontium while leaving yttrium in solution;
PA1  discarding the solution to leave the fourth precipitate essentially free of
      yttrium;
PA1  adding DTPA to the fourth precipitate to place said fourth precipitate in
      solution;
PA1  standing the fourth precipitate solution for a seven day in-growth period
      wherein yttrium-90 is allowed to form;
PA1  separating yttrium from strontium after the seven day in-growth period; and
PA1  counting the yttrium to determine the strontium concentration.